Add Engage 13.8.0-rc1, 16.3.0-rc1 and 17.2.0-rc1 release notes (#7911)
umbraco/UmbracoDocs: 13/umbraco-engage/upgrading/schema-alignment-guide.md

  Engage 13.8.0, including the rewritten analytics data cleanup system.
---

# Schema Alignment Guide

Engage 13.8.0 introduces a rewritten analytics data cleanup system and a database schema alignment. This guide walks you through the required post-upgrade steps.

## Analytics data cleanup changes

The analytics data cleanup has been fully rewritten. It now processes all eligible records in a single pass rather than working in fixed-size batches.

### New configuration settings

The cleanup schedule is configured under `Engage:Analytics:DataCleanup` in your `appsettings.json`:

{% code title="appsettings.json" %}
```json
{
  "Engage": {
    "Analytics": {
      "DataCleanup": {
        "Enabled": true,
        "FirstRunTime": null,
        "StartupDelay": "00:05:00",
        "Interval": "1.00:00:00",
        "CommandTimeout": 1200
      }
    }
  }
}
```
{% endcode %}

| Setting | Description | Default |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `Enabled` | Whether the data cleanup process runs at all. | `true` |
| `FirstRunTime` | Optional crontab expression to schedule the first cleanup run. Takes precedence over `StartupDelay` when set. | `null` |

> | `StartupDelay` | Time after application startup before the first cleanup run. Only used when `FirstRunTime` is not set. | `00:05:00` (5 minutes) |

Author: Just a small note about the takes precedence/only used wording here: the configured delay is still used if the calculated delay of the first run time is lower (so it acts as a minimum delay). This is mostly an implementation detail of the [`DelayCalculator.GetDelay()` helper from the CMS](https://github.com/umbraco/Umbraco-CMS/blob/54b6c22e84735d5be31095c31d70c27a1430f9d0/src/Umbraco.Infrastructure/BackgroundJobs/DelayCalculator.cs#L63-L67).

### Post-upgrade steps

After upgrading to 13.8.0, follow these steps during a **maintenance window**:

{% stepper %}
{% step %}
#### 1. Determine a safe DeleteAnalyticsDataAfterDays value

Run the `GetDeleteAnalyticsDataAfterDays.sql` script against your database. This analyzes your data volume and recommends a safe initial value for the `DeleteAnalyticsDataAfterDays` setting.

Update your `appsettings.json` with the recommended value before proceeding. This ensures the first cleanup run does not attempt to delete an excessive number of records at once.

{% hint style="info" %}
This step is optional but recommended. It prevents the first cleanup run from processing a large backlog of data, which could cause long-running queries and lock contention.
{% endhint %}
{% endstep %}

{% step %}
#### 2. Ensure data consistency

Run the `EnsureDataConsistency.sql` script against your database. This script cleans up orphaned records across all Engage tables. It removes or nullifies rows that reference non-existent parent records, and then re-validates all existing foreign key constraints.

> This step is **required** before running the schema alignment script. Without it, the `CompleteAlignSchema.sql` script will fail if orphaned data violates the new constraints.

Author: The `CompleteAlignSchema` script doesn't introduce **new** constraints: all it does is ensure the `ON DELETE CASCADE` is set on all of them (which requires re-creating the foreign keys). However, some databases had disabled/untrusted foreign key constraints, which would allow values without 'parent records'.

{% endstep %}

{% step %}
#### 3. Complete the schema alignment

Run the `CompleteAlignSchema.sql` script against your database. This adds the missing foreign keys, indexes, and constraints that align your schema with a clean install.

> 
> {% hint style="warning" %}
> The script contains 6 numbered batches separated by `GO` statements. Execute each batch separately and verify it completes successfully before proceeding to the next.
> {% endhint %}

Author: The script also includes an initial validation and final completion step, so I wouldn't recommend manually executing each step separately.

Let's remove this warning:

```suggestion
```

Author: Or update the warning to explicitly note that users need to validate the output:

```suggestion

{% hint style="warning" %}
The script contains 6 numbered batches separated by `GO` statements (besides validation and completion steps). Ensure each batch has completed successfully by inspecting the retuned/printed messages.
{% endhint %}
```

{% endstep %}
{% endstepper %}

### Monitoring

> After completing the schema alignment, two health checks are available in the Umbraco Health Check dashboard:

Author: These health checks are available after the upgrade and will only return a successful result after the schema alignment:

```suggestion
Two new Engage health checks are available in the Umbraco Health Check dashboard:
```

* **Database Schema Status** — Verifies the `Umbraco.Engage+DatabaseSchemaStatus` key is set to `Complete`.
* **Constraint Integrity** — Validates that all expected foreign keys and indexes are present.

### Downloading the scripts

{% file src="../scripts/GetDeleteAnalyticsDataAfterDays.sql" %}
Recommends a safe initial `DeleteAnalyticsDataAfterDays` value based on your data.
{% endfile %}

{% file src="../scripts/EnsureDataConsistency.sql" %}
Run during a maintenance window **before** `CompleteAlignSchema.sql` to clean up orphaned data and verify all foreign key constraints.
{% endfile %}

{% file src="../scripts/CompleteAlignSchema.sql" %}

> Run during a maintenance window **after** `EnsureDataConsistency.sql` to add missing foreign keys, indexes, and constraints. **Execute each batch individually** — do not run the entire script at once.

Author: ```suggestion
Run during a maintenance window **after** `EnsureDataConsistency.sql` to add missing foreign keys, indexes, and constraints.
```
